---
title: "Lambda-PFLOTRAN 1.0: a workflow for incorporating organic matter chemistry informed by ultra high resolution mass spectrometry into biogeochemical modeling"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
excerpt: "Organic matter (OM) composition plays a central role in microbial respiration of dissolved organic matter and subsequent biogeochemical reactions. Here, a direct connection of organic matter chemistry and thermodynamics to reactive transport simulators has been achieved through the newly developed Lambda-PFLOTRAN workflow tool that succinctly incorporates carbon chemistry data generated from Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTICR-MS) into reaction networks to simulate organic matter degradation and the resulting biogeochemistry."
permalink: https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/17/8955/2024/
venue: 'Geoscientific Model Development'
citation: ' Muller, Katherine A; Jiang, Peishi; Hammond, Glenn E; Ahmadullah, Tasneem; Song, Hyun-Soeb; Ward, Nicholas; Bowe, Madison; Chu, Rosalie; Zhao, Qian; Garayburu-Caruso, Vanessa A; Roebuck, Alan; Chen, Xingyuan. “Lambda-PFLOTRAN 1.0: Workflow for Incorporating Organic Matter Chemistry Informed 
by Ultra High Resolution Mass Spectrometry into Biogeochemical Modeling.” Geoscientific Model Development, 2024. doi:10.5194/gmd-17-8955-2024'
---
Abstract: Organic matter (OM) composition plays a central role in microbial respiration of dissolved organic matter and subsequent biogeochemical reactions. Here, a direct connection of organic matter chemistry and thermodynamics to reactive transport simulators has been achieved through the newly developed Lambda-PFLOTRAN workflow tool that succinctly incorporates carbon chemistry data generated from Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTICR-MS) into reaction networks to simulate organic matter degradation and the resulting biogeochemistry. Lambda-PFLOTRAN is a Python-based workflow, executed through a Jupyter notebook interface, that digests raw FTICR-MS data, develops a representative reaction network based on substrate-explicit thermodynamic modeling (also termed lambda modeling due to its key thermodynamic parameter λ used therein), and completes a biogeochemical simulation with the open source, reactive flow and transport code PFLOTRAN. The workflow consists of the following five steps: configuration, thermodynamic (lambda) analysis, sensitivity analysis, parameter estimation, and simulation output and visualization. Two test cases are provided to demonstrate the functionality of the Lambda-PFLOTRAN workflow. The first test case uses laboratory incubation data of temporal oxygen depletion to fit lambda parameters (i.e., maximum utilization rate and microbial carrying capacity). A slightly more complex second test case fits multiple lambda formulation and soil organic matter release parameters to temporal greenhouse gas generation measured during a soil incubation. Overall, the Lambda-PFLOTRAN workflow facilitates upscaling by using molecular-scale characterization to inform biogeochemical processes occurring at larger scales.
